[1]
Hello everyone. I'm Geliang from the MPTCP community. I'm one of the core upstream developers of MPTCP since 2020. I live in Beijing, China and work at a Chinese Linux distribution company, called Kylin Software.

Here I bring a proposal to add MPTCP support for NVMe. This approach achieves a multi-fold /ˈmʌl.tɪ.fəʊld/ performance improvement over using NVMe TCP in multiple /ˈmʌl.tɪ.pl/ network devices environments.

[2]
First of all, I want to say thanks to everyone who helped me during the development of this feature.

[3]
And here is the agenda /əˈdʒen.də/. First, I'll give a very brief introduction to MPTCP. Then the motivations of NVMe MPTCP. Next, I'll show the patch list of all the changes. Then I'll show a demo /ˈde.məʊ/ of how to use NVMe MPTCP, and what the benefit is. Next, how NVMe MPTCP is implemented. And the last is the discussion (/dɪˈskʌʃ.ən/).

[4]
Here I will give a very brief introduction to MPTCP.

MPTCP, or Multipath TCP, is an extension to the standard TCP and is defined in RFC 8684.

MPTCP is implemented via TCP options. A dedicated TCP option is defined for MPTCP, and its kind number is 30.

It allows a device to use multiple network interfaces at the same time to send and receive TCP packets /ˈpæk.ɪt/ over a single connection.

MPTCP can be used for combining the bandwidth of multiple interfaces or choosing the best path with the lowest latency. It also supports fail-over /ˈfeɪl/: if one path goes down, traffic is smoothly switched to another path without interruption.

It was introduced in Linux kernel 5.6. After more than six years of development, it has become mature /məˈtʃʊə/ and stable, and more and more network applications already support MPTCP.

How to use it?

First, we need to do address /əˈdres/ configuration, which is handled by the path manager. We can use 'ip mptcp' commands to do it manually, or we can use the MPTCP daemon (ˈdiː.mən) (mptcpd) to do it automatically.

Then, we need to create MPTCP sockets both on the server side and client side. If only one side uses MPTCP, the connection will fall back /fɔːl bæk/ to TCP. We need to explicitly pass the protocol number IPPROTO_MPTCP (that is 262) as the third parameter of socket() syscall to create an MPTCP socket. Or, without changing any code, we can use the BPF tool to force a TCP application to use MPTCP.

After the MPTCP sockets are created, we can use them just like TCP sockets, with no difference. Inside the MPTCP protocol stack /stæk/, multiple TCP sockets are created in kernel space to send and receive data, based on the address configuration; we call each TCP socket a subflow.

For more details, please visit the project website: mptcp.dev

[5]
Why do we need NVMe MPTCP?

First, all current use cases for MPTCP are in userspace. NVMe TCP runs in kernel-space. So adding MPTCP support to NVMe provides the first kernel‑space use case for MPTCP. This helps us verify the functionality of MPTCP from kernel space and add missing features - like read_sock interface and TLS encryption - which were not implemented in MPTCP before.

Second, in multiple network device environments, NVMe TCP can only use a single network device, so the bandwidth is limited by the speed of that single device. With MPTCP, we can aggregate the bandwidth of all available devices on both the target side and the host side, achieving a multi‑fold performance improvement - as we will see in the demo.

Third, MPTCP allows a fail-over. If a path fails, traffic switches to another path without breaking the NVMe connection. So we get better reliability without adding complexity to NVMe layer.

These are the main motivations behind this work.

[6]
I started working on this feature about a year ago. Currently, the implementation and testing are mostly done. Some code is upstreamed, while most remains under review on MPTCP side, in RFC stage.

The modifications in the NVMe subsystem are minimal. Most of the code changes are on the MPTCP side.

Here are the patchsets:

1 mptcp: implement .read_sock (/riːd/ underscore)

NVMe TCP uses read_sock interface for receiving data. However, it was not implemented in MPTCP before /bɪˈfɔː(r)/, since all current use cases for MPTCP are in userspace, where read_sock is not used. So my first task was to implement this interface for MPTCP.

After several rounds of iteration, this set was merged into Linux kernel in February this year. With this interface, we can add MPTCP support /səˈpɔːt/ for NVMe now.

2 NVMe over MPTCP

This set adds basic MPTCP support for NVMe, but without TLS encryption /ɪnˈkrɪp.ʃən/. It defines a new transport /ˈtræn.spɔːt/ type for MPTCP, which creates /kriˈeɪt/ MPTCP sockets between the target (ˈtɑːɡɪt) and the host instead of TCP sockets.

This set is currently under review on MPTCP side, and today's discussion is mainly about this set.

3 MPTCP KTLS support

MPTCP did not support TLS before. They conflict with each other to some extent. Because both MPTCP and TLS use ULP, Upper Layer Protocol. ULP settings, including TLS settings, are disabled in MPTCP. If you set TLS for an MPTCP socket, you will get an error code of 'NOT SUPPORTED'. But now NVMe needs to use TLS for encryption, it's time to enable it.

I finally found a solution to make MPTCP and TLS compatible, and implemented MPTCP support on the TLS side and enabled TLS settings on the MPTCP side. Need to say, only software TLS encryption is supported for MPTCP right now; hardware TLS has not yet been developed.

This set is currently under review on MPTCP side, and I believe it will be upstreamed this year.

4 Enable KTLS for NVMe MPTCP

Once TLS is supported /səˈpɔː.tɪd/ for MPTCP, using TLS for NVMe MPTCP becomes straightforward /ˌstreɪtˈfɔː.wəd/. Only need to enable TLS setting in configfs for the MPTCP transport type.

5 The next is about user space changes

User space libraries (ˈlaɪ.brər.i) and tools, including libnvme (lɪb), nvme-cli, and ktls-utils, also need to add MPTCP support.

6 The last is fixes for MPTCP corner cases

During the development of NVMe MPTCP, some MPTCP corner‑cases were triggered, and these bugs needed to be fixed.

That's all the patch list.

[7]
Now let's look at a demo.

This demo is the selftest script for NVMe MPTCP, it is the last patch in the 'NVMe over MPTCP' patch set.

This script takes three arguments. The first is the transport type, which can be set to 'tcp' or 'mptcp'. The second is the I/O policy, which can be set to 'numa', 'round-robin'(ˈrɒb.ɪn), or 'queue-depth'. The third is 'tls', which controls whether TLS encryption is used.

This test creates two network namespaces. One is used to run the NVMe target, that is the server side, and the other is used to run the NVMe host, that is the client side. Each namespace has four virtual /ˈvɜː.tʃu.əl/ network devices, and each network device is limited to a speed of 100 megabytes /ˈmeɡ.ə.baɪts/ per second.

When we run NVMe TCP in this environment, the 'fio' benchmark shows the speed is about 100 megabytes per second, as we expected. That means only the first network device on both sides is used for NVMe TCP communication, and the other three network devices are unused and not involved.

When we use NVMe MPTCP in the next slide, this is not the case at all.

[8]
Before running NVMe MPTCP, we need to do some configuration to tell MPTCP which IP addresses are available.

We do that with the 'ip mptcp endpoint add' commands. On both sides, we add the IP addresses of the second, third, and fourth network devices into the address list of MPTCP path manager. The difference is, on the target side, we use the 'signal' flags, while on the host side, we use the 'subflow' flags.

After this configuration, we can run NVMe MPTCP now. The 'fio' benchmark shows the speed reached about 400 megabytes per second. That means all four network devices on both sides are used for the NVMe MPTCP communication. It also means that in a four-network-device environment, NVMe MPTCP achieves a four times performance improvement.

I also did similar experiments in environments on real machines with real network devices, and obtained the same conclusion.

How is all this achieved? Let's go to the next slide.

[9]
I took a very practical, engineering-style approach to implement this feature, I first modified the socket creation code for both the target side and host side, hardcoding the protocol number from IPPROTO_TCP to IPPROTO_MPTCP to create MPTCP sockets by force, and then I wrote a test script to run it, and got some failures.

The first is a crash of 'list_add corruption'. Debugging showed it happened inside tcp_sock_set_nodelay. We cannot use the TCP version of the set_nodelay helper on MPTCP sockets; that causes a crash. I need to implement an MPTCP‑specific version of this helper, and use it for MPTCP sockets.

After fixing that, I continued testing. I got another error 'Address already in use' from 'bind()' on the target side, indicating that the reuse address (set_reuseaddr) behavior was not set correctly, so I then implemented an MPTCP‑specific version of set_reuseaddr helper too, and used it for MPTCP sockets.

Then on the host side the 'nvme disconnect' command sometimes failed. That turned out to be no_linger behavior not being set correctly for MPTCP sockets. So I implemented an MPTCP‑specific version of no_linger helper too, and used it for MPTCP sockets.

In the end, I realized that all the helpers used to change the behavior of NVMe sockets needed to have MPTCP‑specific versions and to be used for MPTCP sockets. They are six helpers in total. After switching to using all six MPTCP‑specific helpers, the tests worked well and became stable.

Then I thought all the changes were done. I went back to think about the code architecture.

I abstracted all the places that needed to be changed from TCP to MPTCP into a structure, which can describe all the differences between using TCP and MPTCP in NVMe. It includes the protocol number and the six interfaces that change socket behavior, and then defines two different instances of this structure, one for TCP and the other for MPTCP, and then switches between them based on the transport type.

However, there are slight differences between the interfaces on the target side and the host side. set_reuseaddr interface is only used on the target, while set_syncnt is only used on the host. It ended up being separated into two structures: one for the target (nvmet_tcp_proto) and the other for the host (nvme_tcp_proto).

Let's look at the target one first.

[10]
On the target side, we define a NVMe target tcp_proto structure, and put the protocol number and the five interfaces to change the behavior of the socket into it, and define two instances of this structure for TCP and MPTCP. Add a pointer to this structure in nvme target tcp_port.

Define a new MPTCP transport type, and a new MPTCP fabrics ops. This ops is the same as the TCP one, only the transport type is different.

When adding a port, the add_port callback is called for both TCP and MPTCP. In this callback, initialize the pointer in tcp_port to a different instance based on whether the transport type is TCP or MPTCP.

Afterwards, we access the instance through the pointer in tcp_port, and use the protocol number of this instance to create the socket and call the corresponding interfaces of this instance to change the socket behavior.

That is the implementation of the target side.

[11]
The implementation on the host side is similar.

Define a NVMe tcp_proto structure, and put the protocol number and the five interfaces to change the behavior of the socket into it, and define two instances of this structure for TCP and MPTCP. Add a pointer to this structure in NVMe tcp_ctrl. Then, define a new MPTCP transport ops, which is the same as the TCP one, only the name is different. When allocating a new tcp_ctrl, initialize its pointer to a different instance based on the transport name is "tcp" or "mptcp". Afterwards, we access the instance through the pointer in tcp_ctrl, use this instance to create the socket and change its behavior.

What do you think of this approach?

[12]
Here I have listed several frequently asked questions:

1 Can we, keep the NVMe code unchanged, just use MPTCP tools to convert NVMe TCP to use MPTCP by force?

The answer is no. Tools like mptcpize and BCC mptcpify allow legacy (ˈleɡ.ə.si old) TCP programs to use MPTCP without code changes - they dynamically replace TCP socket creation with MPTCP socket creation at runtime in the path of the socket syscall. NVMe TCP creates sockets directly from kernel space and does not invoke socket syscalls, so these tools have no effect. We do need to change the NVMe code to add MPTCP support.

2 Can NVMe MPTCP work with NVMe multipath? Both of their names contain 'multipath'.

The answer is yes. They work together at different layers. The selftest of NVMe MPTCP shows that NVME MPTCP can work with different I/O policies, that is NVMe multipath. They can work together with no conflict.

3 Can NVMe MPTCP work with Block multiqueue?

The answer is yes too. There is not just one TCP connection between the target and host - NVMe TCP uses block multiqueue to establish several TCP connections between them. It includes one admin queue for management traffic and several I/O queues for data traffic. NVMe MPTCP changes all these TCP connections to MPTCP connections, both the admin queue and the I/O queues.

4 How to select MPTCP? A new transport type? or A TCP variant?

The current approach is to define a new transport type for MPTCP. That is straightforward.

Another option is to declare MPTCP as a TCP 'variant'. For example, in the TSAS (Transport Specific Address Subtype), just as SECTYPE represents the versions of TLS (1.2 or 1.3), a new PROTOTYPE can be added here to represent the protocol is TCP, MPTCP or other future protocols.

[13]
Here is the contact information for myself and the MPTCP community. You can find me on GitHub, and you can send me an email.

[14]
Here are references. If you want to use this feature, you can find all the patches here.

The last one is the email thread for this topic. Feel free to reply with any thoughts, suggestions, or questions.

[15]
If you have any questions, we can address them here. If I can't answer it immediately, I'll follow up with you by email or some other way.

Thank you very much for your interest in NVMe MPTCP. I know the process will take a long time, but I'll do my best to push this feature upstream.
